---
title: The Time Mill
---

The sun melted like an iceberg behind me as I handed the lady a five-dollar bill and told her to keep the change and waited for the canoe to arrive. She dropped some solid bubbles into the tea and they sank to the bottom of the cup like stones. I sucked on the straw as the brown balls entered my mouth. I chewed them like tapioca. With each sip I saw the wrinkles in my hands disappear and my forearms were bulging, sinews as tight as a cedar's trunk. When the boat arrived, I passed the tea to the blue heron at the bow, plucked a feather and began to stroke the dark river. The canoe glided along in silence, past lotus flowers, frog-laden lily pads and through a rolling thick mist and then I saw my destination; the mill. Golden fish swam around us in warped orbits when we arrived. The blue heron stayed inside the canoe and waited with a hungry smile. A carved inverted cone stood as tall as a fully-grown maple tree and the gilded paint flashed in the moon's glow. We approached it slowly, and once the shape of my feather's shadow was no longer bent, I knew that I could enter the hatch.

Inside the cone was a long coiled ramp. I crawled in on all fours and looked at the walls painted in turquoise and red, which depicted my mythic struggles with a cobra. The cobra's tale began at the base of the coil and Sanskrit tiles wrapped around the walls and ended at the cone's tip. When I reach the pinnacle of the cone, I grabbed the carved femur of a giraffe and struck the crystal bell. I did not hear its initial sound, only the echo that bounced back from against the horizon. The deep chime signaled the Buddha's spell. I promptly boarded the canoe and saw the heron with a golden fish in a beak. Not much was left to do, so I paddled carefully to the stilted hut on the river and sipped my tea.

A rope ladder hung from the hut, and I climbed it to reach the inside where thirty-three stoic Buddhas sat in a circle. I sat in the middle of them; my wristwatch's face winked at me and I winked back. It was time. I bowed in reverence. Without further notice, each of their bellies one after another was quivering. In unison they erupted into a simultaneous belly laugh. I sipped my tea, shot the solid balls from my straw into their open mouths and observed them now levitating.  Sighing with contentment, I laughed back. Then I hopped aboard the canoe, nodded to the heron and paddled into the vast morning star.

 My work was complete as the silhouette of the  time mill hung in the night.  As I paddled back towards the dock the crevices in my hand became more prominent.  It wouldn't be long, I thought to myself before I could order another cup of tea.
